All right.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon everyone.
Before we start, Don has asked me to remind you
NOTE CONF
that if you want to change your tutorial group, do
not email him.
NOTE CONF
Don't email me either.
Do not email Kendall.
NOTE CONF
Do not email Vito.
None of us can do anything about it.
NOTE CONF
The only thing you can do is fill in the
tutorial change group request form, which is linked to from
NOTE CONF
somewhere on the page.
Um, tutorial allocation seems to be well, it seems to
NOTE CONF
have happened.
Whether it's happened correctly, I don't know or most of
NOTE CONF
you in tutorials according to your timetables.
Now how many knows, right?
NOTE CONF
Somebody will try to mark your work and hopefully you'll
be in a tutorial by the time they happen.
NOTE CONF
If you if it comes to first day and you
haven't been assigned to a tutorial, just turn up to
NOTE CONF
a random one and tell the tutor.
If you're wondering why an informatics department can't assign you
NOTE CONF
to tutorials, it's because it's not us doing it.
It's a new system.
NOTE CONF
We have a wonderful new time timetabling system which does
not connect properly to all the other systems we use.
NOTE CONF
Every week I have to download a manual list of
where you are in order to assign your coursework.
NOTE CONF
Um, all right.
So last time, or rather last week, we talked about
NOTE CONF
bits and binary encodings, and we talked about propositional logic.
And right at the end I talked a little bit
NOTE CONF
about predicate logic.
And I said predicate logic.
NOTE CONF
First order logic is way too difficult.
So we're not going to do that.
NOTE CONF
And we're going to do something easier.
So that will be what we're doing for the next
NOTE CONF
2 or 3 weeks.
Before I start on that, are there any questions hanging
NOTE CONF
over from the last week?
Anybody come across something that they wanted to ask?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we are now going to skip back quite a
NOTE CONF
long way.
2500 years or so.
NOTE CONF
2250 years.
And look at some good old philosophical logic.
NOTE CONF
I will show you later that if we were going
to look at good old philosophical logic in the way
NOTE CONF
that Aristotle did and the way that people did for
the next 1800 years, it would be quite painful.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to look at it from a modern
point of view, with modern notation and modern ideas, which
NOTE CONF
makes it much more attractive than it used to be.
There's an optional lecture in the middle of the course,
NOTE CONF
if you really want to know the horrors that your
predecessors in 1400 had to go through.
NOTE CONF
So I want to work with examples.
And in order to work with examples, I want something
NOTE CONF
nice and simple with some easy properties.
So we're going to work with this universe.
NOTE CONF
So remember from last week universe is a technical term.
It just means a set of things that we're going
NOTE CONF
to talk about.
And I'm going to talk about some shapes.
NOTE CONF
And these shapes have various properties.
So if you look at what I've put up in
NOTE CONF
front of you, you can see that there are shapes.
There are three different node, two different shapes at the
NOTE CONF
moment disks and triangles or circles and triangles.
You can see that there are at least two different
NOTE CONF
sizes of things, because there are big things and small
things, and you can see that there are different colours.
NOTE CONF
I believe that I have chosen the colours so that
everything is distinct, even for full colour blindness.
NOTE CONF
If you happen to suffer from colour blindness and you
don't find these distinct, please get in touch with me
NOTE CONF
so I can address that.
Um, are there any other properties that you think might
NOTE CONF
be relevant?
So I haven't told you what I'm going to use,
NOTE CONF
but staring at this diagram.
Ah, there are other properties I might be going to
NOTE CONF
use.
So I mentioned size.
NOTE CONF
So big things in small things here.
Orientation, rotation.
NOTE CONF
Um, I've got some more or less upright things.
I've got some more or less sideways things.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's a bit difficult to tell the difference between
an upright circle and a rotated circle, so probably I'm
NOTE CONF
not going to use that.
Um, no, there is nothing else.
NOTE CONF
So it's just size, colour and shape.
So this is a universe that is small enough to
NOTE CONF
talk about, but big enough to be interesting.
Here are a bunch of statements about this universe expressed
NOTE CONF
in English.
Um, I hope that you can all look at each
NOTE CONF
of these statements and look at the universe next to
it, and decide whether each statement is true or false.
NOTE CONF
For example, every red triangle is small is.
True, every small triangle is red.
NOTE CONF
On the other hand, It's false.
Okay, that was quite easy, wasn't it?
NOTE CONF
Um, we'll leave those for the moment.
What did you do when I asked you these two
NOTE CONF
questions?
How did you go about determining whether they were true
NOTE CONF
or false?
Um, somebody said observation.
NOTE CONF
A bit more detail.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So they're searching for something that contradicts them.
So looking for a counterexample we say in mathematics, for
NOTE CONF
example, in this one every small triangle is red.
You see a small triangle here that is green.
NOTE CONF
And that's enough to tell you for that.
Every red triangle is small.
NOTE CONF
How did you convince yourself that that was true?
Again, you maybe looked for a red triangle that was
NOTE CONF
not small, or maybe you just stared at it and
said, yes, that's right.
NOTE CONF
Um, one of the interesting things about human reasoning is
that we have a fast, intuitive, and imprecise way of
NOTE CONF
reasoning about small things.
So this universe is maybe a little bit too big
NOTE CONF
for that to come into play, but for things up
to around five or so, maybe a bit bigger, depending
NOTE CONF
on who you are, we look at something and decide
immediately whether things are true or not.
NOTE CONF
Whereas if I gave you 20 objects, then you would
have to probably count them and make notes.
NOTE CONF
If I gave you 200 objects, you would.
Or do you do?
NOTE CONF
If I gave a universe with 200 objects and asked
you to check one of these things?
NOTE CONF
Write a program.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
The best for correct computer science.
Answer to almost all questions, but not all questions.
NOTE CONF
Because sometimes it takes longer to write the program than
to do it yourself.
NOTE CONF
So what we're going to do now is think a
bit about trying to formalise.
NOTE CONF
We'll make it a little bit more precise.
The thought process we went through in order to determine
NOTE CONF
whether these statements were true or false.
But first, let me talk about these statements and why
NOTE CONF
I've chosen these particular statements.
So if you look at the format there, you see
NOTE CONF
they all have this form.
They start with what in linguistics we call a quanta
NOTE CONF
or maths we call a quantifier every some or no.
And then there's a noun or noun phrase rather red
NOTE CONF
triangle, small triangle, red thing.
Then there's a verb is which in many languages would
NOTE CONF
be unnecessary.
There might be a negation.
NOTE CONF
I don't have an example there, but there could be
a knot.
NOTE CONF
And then there's an adjective, a predicate, as we called
it last time.
NOTE CONF
So statements that have this form every.
Some know A is or is not B are what
NOTE CONF
we're going to call categorical propositions.
So this is a definition.
NOTE CONF
It's the modern term for a Greek phrase which I
forget introduced by Aristotle 2300 and something odd years ago.
NOTE CONF
And this is the kind of statement that we're going
to be working with.
NOTE CONF
Is it a simple.
Are these things simple propositional statements as we had last
NOTE CONF
time?
Are they what I call simple propositions?
NOTE CONF
So they're propositions because they're true or false.
But are they simple?
NOTE CONF
So last time, I defined a simple proposition as being
either one of these simple binary propositions that is true
NOTE CONF
or false, or a predicate applied to an object.
So this thing is green is a simple proposition.
NOTE CONF
These are not simple because they talk about lots of
objects.
NOTE CONF
They say every red triangle is small, or some big
triangle is green.
NOTE CONF
So they're talking about more than one thing, which makes
them not simple.
NOTE CONF
Um, these words every some do they remind you of
anything I did right at the end of last lecture?
NOTE CONF
For all.
And there exists so every is English for for all
NOTE CONF
and some is English for there exists.
So this is looking as if it's one of as
NOTE CONF
if it's first order logic.
But it's a very restricted form of first order logic.
NOTE CONF
So at the end of last time I put up
some horrible long formula.
NOTE CONF
That was the definition of a function being everywhere continuous.
And that's the kind of thing we don't want to
NOTE CONF
deal with.
So we're going to work with a particular simple form
NOTE CONF
of statements that does allow us to use some level
of for all in there exists, but only in this
NOTE CONF
very restricted way.
Any questions?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So every red triangle is small.
Let me give you what I claim is a formalisation
NOTE CONF
of the process.
You might have gone through in order to check that
NOTE CONF
you might have looked for red things, and you might
have looked for triangular things, and you might have looked
NOTE CONF
for things that are in both regions that are red
and triangular.
NOTE CONF
And you might have observed that there is nothing in
this tiny region here, which is the area of red
NOTE CONF
triangular things that are not small because they're outside the
small thing, small area.
NOTE CONF
You probably didn't do anything as conscious as that, but
if you had to write a program to do it,
NOTE CONF
that's the kind of thing you would be doing.
Some plausible.
NOTE CONF
So some people are nodding.
You're very welcome to say no.
NOTE CONF
It's completely implausible.
I didn't do anything of the sort.
NOTE CONF
Anybody want to say that?
No.
NOTE CONF
I don't think I did.
I just looked at it because I drew this diagram.
NOTE CONF
So I know it took me a lot of conscious
effort to do this.
NOTE CONF
Um, every small triangle is red.
Well, that was the one where we could look for
NOTE CONF
a counterexample.
So again, we look at small things which I've circled
NOTE CONF
in grey.
We look at triangles, which I've circled in blue.
NOTE CONF
So that gives us these things.
And we look for something that is outside the red
NOTE CONF
region.
And we find one could be that one, or it
NOTE CONF
could have been that one.
One counterexample is enough to disprove a universal statement.
NOTE CONF
We can keep doing this.
Some big triangle is green.
NOTE CONF
Um, well, what am I going to do?
What am I looking for here?
NOTE CONF
So I'm looking for a big triangle that is green.
But how do I program my search strategy?
NOTE CONF
For a small region.
So I'm looking for big triangles.
NOTE CONF
So that's outside of small.
And I'm looking for things that are in the triangle
NOTE CONF
region.
And then I'm looking for something that is green.
NOTE CONF
So in the green region.
And I find an example.
NOTE CONF
So this is a this is an example not a
not a counterexample.
NOTE CONF
This is a statement.
Something exists.
NOTE CONF
There is some big triangle that is green.
And so I'm trying to exhibit one.
NOTE CONF
Um we would do the same with some small disc
is red.
NOTE CONF
This was getting a bit fiddly to draw, but I
managed it.
NOTE CONF
Um, some small disc is red again.
Small disc.
NOTE CONF
Um, I have a small discs.
Small things are here.
NOTE CONF
Discs are here.
These are the only small discs, and I'm looking for
NOTE CONF
an example of one that is inside the red region.
And I don't find it because it would have to
NOTE CONF
be in there and there isn't one.
So there I'm disproving a statement that something exists by
NOTE CONF
looking at the region that has to contain it and
saying there's nothing in it.
NOTE CONF
Um, no red thing is blue.
So this is a negative statement.
NOTE CONF
If I look at red things and I look at
blue things, there's nothing in between.
NOTE CONF
And that's what we expect.
So no red thing is blue.
NOTE CONF
Seems a bit on the obvious side, right?
Um, can you think of a situation in which it
NOTE CONF
might not be obvious?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
But why are we using things that there's this thing
that that does anything.
NOTE CONF
So we're using things in such a way that we
have a red thing, and we have another thing that
NOTE CONF
is blue.
So if we were using thing differently.
NOTE CONF
I mean, yes, and that's a good point.
It's related to the point I'm leading up to.
NOTE CONF
Does this statement have to be true in all universes?
No red thing is blue.
NOTE CONF
No.
Why not?
NOTE CONF
Or if they talk about different things.
So it might be possible for something to be red
NOTE CONF
and blue at the same time.
Um, in English that doesn't work, but in English, purple
NOTE CONF
is what we call a primary colour.
In languages with not many colour terms, the purple thing
NOTE CONF
is red, reddish blue, red, blue.
So maybe it's red and blue at the same time.
NOTE CONF
But more importantly, remember that a universe is an abstract
thing.
NOTE CONF
So just because in this universe, red means red and
blue means blue.
NOTE CONF
And it's a fact about human colour perception that things
are not generally red and blue at the same time.
NOTE CONF
We could be in another universe where that's not true.
Red might not mean red, and blue might not mean
NOTE CONF
blue.
So in this particular universe, the words mean what we
NOTE CONF
think they mean.
But universes are entirely abstract things.
NOTE CONF
There's no meaning assigned in advance to English words.
We have to state what they mean as part of
NOTE CONF
the universe.
And in this case, I've defined the universe so that
NOTE CONF
these things are blue and I've coloured them to make
them look like they are indeed blue.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, because I've lost one of my display connectors, I
NOTE CONF
don't have my normal laptop and set up, so I
can't remember what the next slide is.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, any questions about this Semi-Formal way of searching for
NOTE CONF
proofs or counterexamples.
Okay, so what we're going to be leading up to
NOTE CONF
probably not today, but maybe today, depending on how things
go, is formalising this a little bit more so that
NOTE CONF
it works with abstract objects instead of specific universes?
So a few minutes ago, I said that these categorical
NOTE CONF
propositions are in some sense predicate logic, and they are
a very restricted form of predicate logic.
NOTE CONF
So using standard predicate logic notation, this is what the
categorical statements look like.
NOTE CONF
So every red thing is small in traditional modern logical
notation we would write that as for all x where
NOTE CONF
is x.
Sorry x is red implies x is small.
NOTE CONF
We're going to be working with this kind of notation.
In the programming we do so it's necessary to understand
NOTE CONF
it.
So this is the point where we can start talking
NOTE CONF
about what these symbols for all and there exists mean.
So given that for all means for all, every every
NOTE CONF
x, if I look at every any x then if
it's red it is small.
NOTE CONF
Is that consistent and happy with what we've done so
far?
NOTE CONF
Anybody have any worries about what that notation is meaning?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Why is there a dot simply to separate the x
from the ears?
NOTE CONF
Um.
there are a bazillion different notations for this.
NOTE CONF
I am extremely lazy, so I always choose the notation
which has the fewest symbols in it.
NOTE CONF
Some people will write.
With square brackets.
NOTE CONF
I like dots because I can read the dot as
such that particularly in the existential case, there exists an
NOTE CONF
x such that.
But it's just notation.
NOTE CONF
Punctuation, really.
Anything else?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so here's a slightly more complex example.
Every small triangle is red.
NOTE CONF
How do we talk about something being.
A small triangle.
NOTE CONF
Well, if it's a small triangle in English, that means
that in logic it's small and it's a triangle.
NOTE CONF
So the logical formula that we would write here is
for every x, if x is small and x is
NOTE CONF
a triangle, then x is red.
Does that make sense?
NOTE CONF
Using the boolean combinations that we talked about last time,
something a little curious, we seem to have privileged the
NOTE CONF
word triangle here, because triangle is a noun and small
is an adjective.
NOTE CONF
But in our universe there is no hierarchy.
It's not the case that shape is more important than
NOTE CONF
size or colour.
How might we rephrase this to make it match the
NOTE CONF
logic a little more accurately but keep it in English.
Every small triangular shape or thing.
NOTE CONF
So thing is the word I'm using in in this
universe.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So this is just one of those small little quirks
NOTE CONF
that you always, you have to think about when you
turn natural language into formulae, which bits of natural language
NOTE CONF
are supposed to be important and which are just because
we're talking in English.
NOTE CONF
So similarly here some small disc is read.
This is an existential statement where asserting the existence of
NOTE CONF
something.
So this says there is some x such that x
NOTE CONF
is small and x is a disc and x is
read.
NOTE CONF
So the structure here looks rather different.
When we talked about a universal property, the stuff that
NOTE CONF
came before the ears was on the left side of
an arrow, and what came after the is was on
NOTE CONF
the right side of an arrow in the existential statement.
Then we're just using and.
NOTE CONF
If I'm using an.
So I've got small desk and red all joined by
NOTE CONF
ans but I've got brackets here because that's the way
the sentences do.
NOTE CONF
The brackets matter.
They don't matter for an because and is associative.
NOTE CONF
You can put the brackets anywhere you want.
What does that tell us about other two statements that
NOTE CONF
are basically the same as this.
Is for some small read things are disks some.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So any permutation of small disk and read is basically
NOTE CONF
the same statement in logical form if you take the
brackets away.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So don't do this now, but think about it later.
NOTE CONF
Going back and looking at the definition of a categorical
statement that I had back here.
NOTE CONF
So this is all the possible categorical statements that we're
going to talk about.
NOTE CONF
Try to write down the general logical forms in this
predicate logic notation that categorical propositions can take.
NOTE CONF
Um, you'll find this useful because you're going to be
programming these things.
NOTE CONF
Programming stuff is a very good way of making sure
that you understand it.
NOTE CONF
Precisely.
And.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so before I talk about programming, any final questions
about these definitions and notions that we've just introduced.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so I'm supposed to be teaching you computation and
logic.
NOTE CONF
I'm not supposed to be teaching you Haskell.
And since I'm no expert in Haskell, it's a good
NOTE CONF
thing that I'm not supposed to be teaching you Haskell.
But nonetheless, we're going to keep these two threads of
NOTE CONF
the course woven together.
And one of the things we're going to do is
NOTE CONF
use Haskell to implement logic.
After all, a programming language isn't just a useless thing
NOTE CONF
you have to learn.
It's supposed to be useful for something.
NOTE CONF
And Haskell is a language that is very well designed
for implementing things about logic.
NOTE CONF
Um, in Don's first real lecture, did he give you
any pep talks about all the wonderful things you can
NOTE CONF
do with Haskell?
Kind of.
NOTE CONF
Did he tell you that Facebook uses Haskell?
Yeah, of course he would.
NOTE CONF
Um, I have no idea why Facebook uses Haskell.
Um.
NOTE CONF
It's remarkable things you would never expect to be well
suited to a language like Haskell turn out to be.
NOTE CONF
But Haskell is really, really good at doing the kind
of logical and mathematical manipulation that we want for things
NOTE CONF
like proving that programs do what they're supposed to do.
So there's a whole enormous industry of verification, software verification,
NOTE CONF
which is essentially about making sure that when your plane
is being flown by the autopilot, it does what it's
NOTE CONF
supposed to do.
And if you follow the news during your lifetime, as
NOTE CONF
you've seen a number of instances where that has failed.
Um, what we would like to do is ensure that
NOTE CONF
there are no failures, because every control system that might
kill people if it goes wrong, is proved to work.
NOTE CONF
Haskell is one of the languages.
Not that people do this directly in Haskell, but Haskell
NOTE CONF
is used to write tools in which people do more
complex verification things.
NOTE CONF
But you're not going to meet that until fourth year.
So here we're just going to do relatively simple computations
NOTE CONF
with logic.
But they will show you that Haskell can be useful
NOTE CONF
for logical computations.
It was even useful for me because later on in
NOTE CONF
the course, there are lots of slides that were that
were very time consuming to produce by hand.
NOTE CONF
And eventually I got fed up and I wrote the
Haskell program to write the slides for me, which saved
NOTE CONF
me a lot of time and also ensured that they
were correct, which hadn't been the case before.
NOTE CONF
I'll mention that when we get to that bit of
the course.
NOTE CONF
So.
Here's let me just go back there.
NOTE CONF
Here is some Haskell speak, which I believe you should
now understand.
NOTE CONF
Right.
This is all Haskell notation that you've seen.
NOTE CONF
You've seen the introduction of a data type called thing,
which just has things called rest through to Z.
NOTE CONF
Um, has this bit of magic been mentioned yet?
No.
NOTE CONF
Um, for the moment, it's just a piece of magic.
It will be explained to you later.
NOTE CONF
What it actually does is just tell Haskell that these
things are supposed to behave the way you expect, so
NOTE CONF
that Z is equal to Z, and it tells Haskell
to do the obvious thing and print them when we
NOTE CONF
want to print them.
But at this stage, it's just magic.
NOTE CONF
And this is defining a Haskell variable called things, which
is a list of all the things in the universe.
NOTE CONF
So this is the universe.
The things are true to Z.
NOTE CONF
Now the question is, how are we going to talk
about the different properties of the things?
NOTE CONF
So the universe is over here for reference on all
these slides.
NOTE CONF
How in Haskell am I going to code up the
idea of things being triangular, red or whatever?
NOTE CONF
So if you were to think about this without being
told how to do it, this is maybe one way
NOTE CONF
that you might think about doing it.
You might say, well, clearly we have a property called
NOTE CONF
colour.
So I'm going to define a data type called colour,
NOTE CONF
which can be the various colours.
We have red blue, green and we have a data
NOTE CONF
type called shape which can be disk or triangle and
a data type called size which can be big or
NOTE CONF
small.
And then you might go off and define a function
NOTE CONF
called colour in lowercase, which takes a thing such as
r, and gives you back a colour such as green.
NOTE CONF
So these are all declarations.
How do you define these functions?
NOTE CONF
You write them down case by case.
So this is the declaration of the function colour with
NOTE CONF
its type.
And this is the start of the definition.
NOTE CONF
The colour of r is green because it is and
the colour of s is green and the colour of
NOTE CONF
t is blue.
So I believe that you can define functions in Haskell
NOTE CONF
now.
So this is familiar to you right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um you could do it like this.
NOTE CONF
But if you did it like this, you would soon
find yourself in a state of having to do way
NOTE CONF
too much work.
Any time.
NOTE CONF
We talked about a different universe.
So there's a cleaner way that we can think about
NOTE CONF
it.
And this is an instance of a general principle of
NOTE CONF
programming problems solving programming problems.
Roughly, you should try to be as general as possible.
NOTE CONF
In the first code you write.
Because if you write something very specific and then you
NOTE CONF
have to make it more general, that's more work.
So if you want to be as general as possible
NOTE CONF
at the beginning, so that you can apply your code
to other circumstances and other situations.
NOTE CONF
So here's another way of approaching it.
Instead of defining a bunch of types, I'm actually going
NOTE CONF
to take the logic seriously.
And the logic we said we have predicates.
NOTE CONF
So is green is a predicate.
It takes a thing and gives you back whether it's
NOTE CONF
green or not.
So we're no longer messing around with colours.
NOTE CONF
We're just dealing with predicates, which is logic, which is
good.
NOTE CONF
So we might say I could define a predicate.
What is the type of predicates?
NOTE CONF
Well, a predicate is a function that takes a thing
and gives you back a true or false.
NOTE CONF
In Haskell, that means a predicate about things is something
that takes a thing, gives you a boolean, so is
NOTE CONF
green would have the type of thing predicate predicates about
things.
NOTE CONF
Happy with that so far.
Now this is where Haskell becomes excitingly polymorphic and depending
NOTE CONF
on where we are, I'm not sure that might have
been in today's lecture.
NOTE CONF
Has this idea been introduced yet?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this is a great thing about Haskell.
You can write functions that are quite general.
NOTE CONF
So this is a function that called rather sorry.
It's a data type called predicate with a parameter called
NOTE CONF
u.
So this is a type.
NOTE CONF
This means that we can type declare predicates about things.
We can declare predicates about numbers or integers or whatever.
NOTE CONF
So here we're defining the predicate type constructor as it's
called, to be a thing that takes some type and
NOTE CONF
gives you back the type from think whatever it is
to boolean.
NOTE CONF
So here green is a predicate on things.
And that's just written like that.
NOTE CONF
So technically inside Haskell this is a type constructor that
takes the type of thing and gives you back predicates
NOTE CONF
about things the same as that, in fact.
But it happens to look conveniently like the mathematical English
NOTE CONF
way of saying it's a predicate about things.
And that means that we can now write functions that
NOTE CONF
work generally on predicates about any universe, without having to
worry about what universe we're actually talking about.
NOTE CONF
Whereas if we did this thing, then we would be
binding our idea of predicate to the specific universe in
NOTE CONF
question.
So this is a case of being general.
NOTE CONF
Define your notion of predicate to be independent of whatever
universe we're currently talking about.
NOTE CONF
Um, so if I do that, how do I write
the definitions for a particular universe?
NOTE CONF
So this is one way you might do it.
You might write out all the definitions are is green.
NOTE CONF
So I say is green of R is true, S
is green.
NOTE CONF
So I say is green of S is true, T
is not green.
NOTE CONF
So I write, is green of t is false, and
so on and so on.
NOTE CONF
This is basically writing out a long table of all
the properties of all the things in the universe, which
NOTE CONF
is ultimately what you have to do in general, because
a universe is an arbitrary thing, and it just comes
NOTE CONF
along with its property definitions.
Of course, in any particular universe, there might be ways
NOTE CONF
in which we can save a bit of time.
So in this universe, if I make this definition is
NOTE CONF
Queen of X is true.
If x is an element of the list r s,
NOTE CONF
y is red of x is the same as is
x an element of the list uv.
NOTE CONF
So again, I believe you have seen all this Haskell
notation.
NOTE CONF
Is anybody want a reminder of what all this stuff
means?
NOTE CONF
So as I said in the first lecture.
It's really important to keep up, so never feel shy
NOTE CONF
about asking if you have moment, even momentarily forgotten what
something means.
NOTE CONF
Um, just as a side issue, I've been talking in
logic about universes, which are sets of objects.
NOTE CONF
Here I'm showing you Haskell.
Is this thing a set?
NOTE CONF
No.
Why isn't it a set?
NOTE CONF
Because it's a list.
Um, what's the difference between lists and sets?
NOTE CONF
Order matters and duplicates matter I can have are twice
in a list.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this sounds like a bad idea, right?
Because I'm supposed to be implementing a logic that is
NOTE CONF
talking about sets, and I'm showing you lots of stuff
that is working with lists.
NOTE CONF
Um, why might I be white?
My.
NOTE CONF
Why might I be doing that?
One of the key words is on the slide.
NOTE CONF
Laziness.
Okay, I'm lazy.
NOTE CONF
Dawns.
Lazy.
NOTE CONF
We're lazy.
You're lazy.
NOTE CONF
This is not the proper way to do it.
The proper way to do it is to define a
NOTE CONF
notion of set in Haskell that works like a set
does.
NOTE CONF
In fact, you don't need to do that because Haskell
has a module that implements sets, so it's just a
NOTE CONF
matter of importing the predefined module.
The reason we don't do that is just because it
NOTE CONF
would reduce introduce additional complication at this point right at
the start of your Haskell careers.
NOTE CONF
So we're being lazy and programming badly because we want
to keep the actual code in front of you very,
NOTE CONF
very simple.
But do bear this in mind.
NOTE CONF
Is this too lazy?
So whenever you do something in a lazy way, it
NOTE CONF
might come back and bite you.
For example, suppose I were to add another object to
NOTE CONF
the universe, so I have to go back and change
this definition.
NOTE CONF
And going back to something I said next time.
This is an even lazier way of doing it.
NOTE CONF
So I've defined green and I've defined red and I
might say, okay, I know there are three colours.
NOTE CONF
Anything that is not green or red must be blue.
So I define thing to be blue.
NOTE CONF
If it is not green or red, how bad is
this as a way of doing it?
NOTE CONF
Very bad because it's true of this universe.
But if I introduce a new colour like yellow, then
NOTE CONF
it will no longer be a good definition.
I will have to go back and find it, and
NOTE CONF
probably I won't do that until I find something wrong
much later.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So let me mention this little footnote.
NOTE CONF
I'm guessing that none of you know who Larry Wall
is.
NOTE CONF
Anybody know who Larry Wall is?
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Uh, for, you know, at least I don't think so.
Um, he wrote lots of things.
NOTE CONF
So.
In particular, there's a programming language called Perl, which is
NOTE CONF
my favourite language.
It's basically what people use before Python.
NOTE CONF
So those of you who are using Python 20 years
ago or 30, whenever it was, you might have used
NOTE CONF
Perl.
Larry Wall also wrote a lot of other things that
NOTE CONF
are no longer maybe.
Yes, he wrote, other things are still very much in
NOTE CONF
use.
For example, if you are writing a big software project,
NOTE CONF
you want to know whether things change and if somebody
else changes something, you want them to be able to
NOTE CONF
send you the change in a form that is short.
So if somebody changes a 10,000 line program by modifying
NOTE CONF
two lines of it, ideally you want them to be
able to send you just the changes and you want
NOTE CONF
to apply that to your version of the program to
get yours up to date with that.
NOTE CONF
It's a very simple task, but it's not so simple
to get it completely right and clean.
NOTE CONF
And there are standard utilities called diff for working out
the smallest difference between two files, and patch for taking
NOTE CONF
a difference and applying it to your old file to
get the new file.
NOTE CONF
Larry wrote those.
He wrote large chunks of Usenet, which is still exists,
NOTE CONF
but most of you have probably not heard of.
Anybody heard of Usenet?
NOTE CONF
Very small number.
Um, it's what we had before.
NOTE CONF
Web forums and social media and all that crap.
It was an efficient way of having conversations, unlike the
NOTE CONF
modern systems.
So Larry is definitely one of my favourite people in
NOTE CONF
the computing, historical historical world.
The three chief virtues of a programmer are laziness, impatience,
NOTE CONF
and hubris.
None of these are things that would be agreed with
NOTE CONF
by software engineers.
So he's definitely talking about programmers rather than software engineers.
NOTE CONF
Laziness.
Why do we want to be lazy in general?
NOTE CONF
Because the short of the code, the easier it is
to understand.
NOTE CONF
And another reason is that your time is very expensive
and computer time is very cheap, so it is not
NOTE CONF
efficient to write some complicated code in order to shave
1% off the running time of your program.
NOTE CONF
Unless it's really, really important that your program is fast.
In almost all circumstances, your time is much more important.
NOTE CONF
Um, it really goes along with impatience.
You can't be bothered to do things perfectly.
NOTE CONF
You do them good enough and come back and bite
you.
NOTE CONF
So this seems a bit contradictory, because not long ago
I said that we should be doing things correctly, and
NOTE CONF
impatience is largely about not doing things correctly.
Unfortunately, in the real world you don't have time to
NOTE CONF
do things perfectly.
Our ideal curiosity how many of you are expecting, or
NOTE CONF
at least thinking about, ending up in a career where
you're going to do significant amounts of programming?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And the others of you might end up doing it
NOTE CONF
because your boss notices you have a computer science degree
and can presumably program.
NOTE CONF
The real world has nasty things like managers and deadlines
and so on.
NOTE CONF
So patience is a virtue.
Hubris.
NOTE CONF
Okay, who knows what hubris means?
Right.
NOTE CONF
Why haven't you asked me yet what hubris means?
Um.
NOTE CONF
Appropriately, hubris is a Greek word very familiar to Aristotle.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Hubris is about pride.
And in Greek mythology, hubris is particularly applied to the
NOTE CONF
kind of pride that makes people stand up and say
things.
NOTE CONF
I bet Zeus couldn't hit me with a thunderbolt from
here, which is swiftly followed by nemesis when Zeus hears
NOTE CONF
them and strikes them down with his lightning bolt.
So in English, hubris is a word used to describe
NOTE CONF
the kind of pride that and overconfidence in your abilities
that leads you to do things that you otherwise wouldn't
NOTE CONF
sensibly do, which is actually quite useful in a programmer,
because you end up taking on some task that is
NOTE CONF
too big for you, and then you have to do
it anyway, because you can't face explaining to your boss
NOTE CONF
why you couldn't do it.
And you learn a lot of stuff and then you've
NOTE CONF
done the task.
So hubris is a benefit sometimes, but if it's a
NOTE CONF
project where failure gets you sacked, then maybe that's not
the best thing to do.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any questions about this slide.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is where we get on to the bit
NOTE CONF
of Haskell that always struck me as a remarkably complicated
thing.
NOTE CONF
Have you done list comprehension yet?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Excellent.
I have to ask this every year because we keep
NOTE CONF
swapping the lectures around because of Don's travel, and I
can never remember what's been done when.
NOTE CONF
So Haskell's list comprehension statement is an amazing thing.
It didn't exist in any of the languages I used
NOTE CONF
when I was starting out.
So this is basically the list version of the statement.
NOTE CONF
The set of x such that x is a member
of things and x is blue, or x is big
NOTE CONF
and x is a disc.
Um, we don't want to do things like this because
NOTE CONF
it isn't a categorical statement, but you can do things
like that.
NOTE CONF
And you will be doing a lot of this.
So given list comprehension and given some Boolean operators on
NOTE CONF
lists which I'll talk about if you haven't done them,
we can talk about categorical statements.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to show you some Haskell for some
of the categorical statements.
NOTE CONF
Every small triangle is red.
So I claim that this is a Haskell statement.
NOTE CONF
What does it mean?
It says give me the list of x is such
NOTE CONF
that x is in things, x is a triangle and
x is small.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that gives me the set of things that are
NOTE CONF
small triangles.
And then I'm going to do a bit of magic.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to say instead of giving me the list
of things that are small triangles, give me the list
NOTE CONF
of truth values of red about things that are small
triangles.
NOTE CONF
So this is basically taking this list and applying the
red predicate to every element of it.
NOTE CONF
So I get back false true false.
because S is not red, V is red and X
NOTE CONF
is not red.
Have you done list comprehensions like this with a predicate
NOTE CONF
in there?
Some people think they have, so probably you have.
NOTE CONF
Um, we'll do a lot of this, but remember, I
mean, the way I like to think of it is
NOTE CONF
forget about the predicate.
Just go back to give me the set of X's
NOTE CONF
that satisfy this property and then apply red to all
those things.
NOTE CONF
If you haven't already, you will come across a function
called map, which applies a predicate to a list of
NOTE CONF
things and gives you back the list of values.
So really, we're just applying red to everything that came
NOTE CONF
out of there.
And then the next bit of wonderful Haskell magic is
NOTE CONF
that Haskell has a Boolean operator.
Something that returns true or false.
NOTE CONF
And what it does is to go down a list
and just and everything together.
NOTE CONF
So if I apply and to this list, it gives
me false and true and false, which is false.
NOTE CONF
So I claim that this Haskell statement here is a
Haskell implementation of every small triangle is read.
NOTE CONF
On the basis of the explanation so far.
How many of you buy that?
NOTE CONF
Very few people buy it.
So those of you who don't buy it, at which
NOTE CONF
point do you get worried?
Are you happy with this line?
NOTE CONF
Set of X's that are triangular and small.
who is positively happy.
NOTE CONF
They understand this line.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Somebody who isn't positively happy.
Can you say more about where you're worried?
NOTE CONF
And if you don't like to say here, then you
can post anonymously on Piazza.
NOTE CONF
So go back, review the Haskell lecture about the list
comprehension and use the textbook.
NOTE CONF
And use this example to think about how list comprehension
is working, because we're going to use these examples for
NOTE CONF
the next 2 or 3 weeks.
So this is a list of things.
NOTE CONF
And this is just applying a particular function.
In this case it's a predicate to all of the
NOTE CONF
things that come back from here.
Here I got the list of x and now I'm
NOTE CONF
just getting is read of, S is read of V
is read of X in Haskell is doing the computation.
NOTE CONF
And this is the thing that you may not yet
have covered in the Haskell courses, but this is an
NOTE CONF
operator on the lists that goes along the list and
does, and each time so forth, and true and false.
NOTE CONF
So what I would like you to do is to
study this slide.
NOTE CONF
Go back to the Haskell Lectures about comprehension, um, and
the various forms there.
NOTE CONF
Try to ensure that you've got it in your head
by Thursday, which is my next lecture.
NOTE CONF
And then at the start of Thursday, we'll go through
this slide again before I go on to the rest
NOTE CONF
of the content.
So see you on Thursday.
NOTE CONF